Although the modern street newspaper began with the 1989 publication of Street News in New York City, newspapers sold by the poor and homeless to generate income and to bring attention to social problems date back to the late 19th century; journalism scholar Norma Fay Green has cited The War Cry, created by the Salvation Army in London in 1879, as an early form of "dissident, underground, alternative publication".
Although the modern street newspaper began with the 1989 publication of Street News in New York City, newspapers sold by the poor and homeless to generate income and to bring attention to social problems date back to the late 19th century; journalism scholar Norma Fay Green has cited The War Cry, created by the Salvation Army in London in 1879, as an early form of "dissident, underground, alternative publication".
Another precursor to the modern street newspaper was Cincinnati's Hobo News, which ran from 1915 to 1930[note 1] and featured writing from prominent labor and social activists as well as Industrial Workers of the World members, alongside contributions of oral history, creative writing, and artwork from hoboes, or itinerant beggars.
Most street papers published before 1970, such as The Catholic Worker (founded in 1933 ), were affiliated with religious organizations.
Most street papers published before 1970, such as The Catholic Worker (founded in 1933 ), were affiliated with religious organizations.
Thus, one motivation for the creation of the first street newspapers was to counter the negative coverage of homeless people that was coming from existing media.
Street News, founded in late 1989 in New York City, is frequently cited as the first modern street newspaper.
While some small papers were already being published when it was founded, Street News attracted the most attention and became the "catalyst" for many other papers.
This growth has been attributed both to changing attitudes and policies towards homeless individuals and to the ease of publishing provided by desktop computers; William Shaw, the editor of the Philippines' Jeepney, has said that government support, especially in the western world, is influential in allowing street newspapers to thrive.
Street papers have been started in many major cities worldwide, mainly in the United States and Western Europe.
Street papers have been established in some cities in Canada, Africa, South America, and Asia.
Even within the United States, some street newspapers (such as Chicago's bilingual Hasta Cuando) are published in languages other than English.
In particular, the INSP was established to help groups that were starting new street newspapers, to bring more mainstream media attention to the street newspaper movement during the 1990s, and to support interaction and cross-talk between street paper publishers and staff from different countries.
The precise demographics of the readership of street newspapers is unclear.
The precise demographics of the readership of street newspapers is unclear.
A pair of 1993 surveys conducted by Chicago's StreetWise suggested that the paper's readers at the time tended to be college-educated, with slightly over half being female, and slightly over half unmarried.
[note 2] The income vendors earn from sales is intended to help them "get back on their feet".
In general, the major American street newspapers do not require prospective vendors to show proof of homelessness or poverty, and they do not require vendors to retire once they find stable housing.
In the United States, since 2008 there have been a growing number of vendors who are "newly needy"—only recently homeless, or with only temporary financial difficulty—as opposed to the "chronically homeless" who have traditionally made up the majority of the vendor force.
For most papers, the majority of revenue comes from sales, donations, and government grants, while some receive advertising revenue from local businesses.
There has been some disagreement among street newspaper publishers and supporters over whether papers should accept advertising, with some arguing that advertising is practical and helps support the paper, and others claiming that many kinds of advertisements are inappropriate in a paper that is mainly geared towards the poor.
Some papers (especially in Europe) operate as autonomous businesses, while others operate as parts of existing organizations or projects.
There are papers that are very successful, such as the UK-based The Big Issue, which in 2001 sold nearly 300,000 copies a week and earned the equivalent of over 20 million USD in profits, but many papers sell as few as 3,000 copies a month and barely generate a profit at all for the publishers.
Many feature contributions from the homeless and the poor in addition to articles by activists and community organizers, including profiles of individual street newspaper vendors.
A 2009 issue of the Lawrence, Kansas-based Change of Heart included a story on the recent bulldozing of a homeless camp, a review of a book on homelessness, a description of the Family Promise organization for homeless support, and a list of community resources; much of this content was submitted by the homeless.
Because of its professional nature and high production values, it has been a frequent target of criticism in an ongoing debate between adherents of professional and grassroots ideals of how street newspapers should work.
In addition to providing some individuals with income and employment, street newspapers are intended to give homeless participants responsibility and independence, and to create a tight-knit homeless community.
Others operate as a program of a larger social services organization—for instance, Chicago's StreetWise can refer vendors to providers of "drug and alcohol treatment, high school equivalency classes, career counseling, and permanent housing".
Furthermore, many of the more activist papers fail to sell well because their writing and production are perceived to be unprofessional and lackluster.
Topics covered are sometimes seen as lacking newsworthy content, and of little relevance or interest to the general public or the homeless community.
Papers such as StreetWise have in the past been criticized as "grim" and for having vendors that are too loud and intrusive.
Finally, anti-homeless legislation often targets street newspapers and vendors; for example, in New York City and Cleveland, laws have prevented vendors from selling papers on public transit or other high-traffic areas, making it difficult for the papers Street News and Homeless Grapevine to earn revenue.
On one side of the debate are papers that seek to function like a business and generate a profit and a wide readership in order to benefit the homeless in a practical way; on the other are papers that seek to provide a "voice" to the homeless and poor without watering down their message for a broad readership.
Timothy Harris, the director of Real Change, has described the two camps as "liberal entrepreneurial" and "radical, grassroots activist".
